Rewrite 2 of tests.md (#752)
package-url/purl-spec: docs/tests.md

## Tests

>This is a draft document to replace the current tests.md file. The scope of 
tests.md is to provide an overall description of PURL tests in the context of 
the PURL test schema. Its scope does not cover how to create a test file or 
how to use the test files for a PURL tool.

>The primary text is a provisional draft based on the existing v0.1 schema and recent proposed changes. There are Discussion sections to track key notes and
questions separately from the current draft text.

>Note that this document uses Ecma standard style conventions for consistency 
with the PURL specification language in the PURL 1st edition standard, e.g., 
bolding key words instead of using code snippet notation (back-ticks).

The Package-URL (PURL) specification provides a JSON Schema and test
files to support language-neutral testing of PURL implementations. The 
objectives for the PURL schema and test files are to enable tools to conform
to the PURL specification for tool functions such as:
- build a canonical PURL string from a set of PURL components 
- parse a PURL string into a set of PURL components
- validate a PURL string and provide messages about the correctness of 
the input PURL

> - analyze a PURL string and correct errors to produce a canonical PURL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- analyze a PURL string and recover from small errors to produce a canonical PURL when possible
```

> The current JSON schema is available at: [`purl-spec/schemas/purl-test.schema-0.1.json`](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/blob/main/schemas/purl-type-definition.schema-1.0.json).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The current JSON schema for test files is available at: [`purl-spec/schemas/purl-test.schema-0.1.json`](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/blob/main/schemas/purl-type-definition.schema-1.0.json).
```

  components or separators between a pair of PURL components.
  - *component-test.json*: These are test files for a specific PURL component.
 See [PR 738](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/pull/738) which adds 
 `tests/spec/qualifiers.json`. 
- [`purl-spec/tests/types/`](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/tree/main/tests/types): This folder contains one JSON test file for each 
registered PURL type. These tests should be focused on test cases that are
specific to a PURL type, such as those for namespace or qualifiers.

Any PURL implementation tool is expected to canonicalize a PURL string or 
PURL components during a parsing or building operation.

>*Discussion for PURL test files*
- After PR 738 is approved/merged we will probably want to create test files
for each PURL component by moving component-specific test cases from
`specification-test.json` to the new test files.
- [Issue 743](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/issues/743) proposes 
that the current test files should be re-organized so that:
  - Everything based on core spec definition is done in the spec tests. all the canonicalization, parsing, building, validation, ...

>   - Type tests only test things that are based on the type definition. Type 

Author: Will include this idea in the next revision

### Test groups

There are two PURL test groups definded in the current v0.1 test schema:
- **base**: "Test group for base conformance tests for PURL building and 
parsing."
- **advanced**: "Test group for advanced tests to support flexible PURL 
building and parsing."

There are examples of **base** and **advanced** test cases across the various
test files but there is no clear pattern likely because the current schema 
definitions are not clear. A proposed new definition is:
- **base**: "Tests that are required for conformance with the PURL 
specification. Base tests are pass/fail."
- **advanced**: Tests that are more permissive (lenient?) than base tests. 
Advanced tests may provide severity messages (new validation test type) or 
correct errors from test input (or both?)

>*Discussion for test groups*
- What is the intersection of test groups with test types?
  - Are **build** or **parse** test types that return only pass/fail always in the **base** test group?
   - Are **build** or **parse** test types that remediate an error always in the **advanced** test group?
  - Are **roundtrip** tests that return only pass/fail always in the **base** 
  test group?

>   - Are **roundtrip** tests that remediate an error always in the **advanced**

Reviewer: Yes

   test group?

>    - Are **validation** tests always in the **advanced** test group?

Reviewer: I guess it makes sense to have them there,

- Is there a better name for the the test groups? Strict and permissive? 

> Or strict and lenient?

Reviewer: Yes both are better, strict/permissive looks like a good one

components.".
- **roundtrip**: "A PURL roundtrip test, parsing then building back a PURL 
from a canonical string input."

>*Discussion and proposed changes for test types*

The current definition for the **roundtrip** test type does not make sense 
because it requires a canonical string input and output. The proposed new 
schema definitions for test types are:

- **build**: A test to build a canonical PURL output string from an input of 
decoded PURL components."
- **parse**: A test to parse decoded components from a PURL input string."
- **roundtrip**: A test to produce a canonical PURL output string from an 
input PURL string.

For the **build** and **parse** test types there is no normative change here -
 just an attempt to improve the text.

#### New validation test type

There is a proposed new **validation** test type from [Issue 692](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/issues/692) and [PR 614](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/pull/614). 
The proposed definition is: "A PURL validation test, checking if a PURL 
follows all the rules for a particular ecosystem."
- A better definition (editorially) would be: "A test to validate that an 

> input PURL string complies with the rules for its PURL type." 

Reviewer: 👍

- The new PURL type test cases in PR 614 are a mixture of **base** and

> **advanced** test groups, but there is no obvious pattern for the difference.

Reviewer: We can fix that, once this doc is finalized

#### Validation test messages:

PR 614 adds a **purl_validation_message** to the test schema with possible 
validation severity values of "info", "warning" or "error". There is no 
specific definition of the difference between info and warning messages, but 
the examples in PURL type test case updates from PR 614 follow the patterns:
- Warning messages for cases where a PURL component does not follow rules 
related to case sensitivity.
- Info messages for cases of an unregistered namespace or qualifier - see also
Issues [690](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/issues/690) and 
[710](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/issues/710).

Validation message notes:

> - The proposed change for validation messages allows multiple messages from a 

Reviewer: 👍

single test case.

> - There is no message returned for a successful validation.

Author: Added comment

> - We will need to clearly define the difference between an info message and a 

Reviewer: Makes sense.

warning message or reduce the set to warning and error messages.
- The messages as shown in the test case examples from PR 614 are clear and 
helpful as presented, but it is not clear if/how some PURL tools will be able 

> to handle such specific messages. See also the following Error 

Reviewer: We are not expecting tools to report the exact same message, just to report a problem of the same type IMHO

In the case of a test case failure the `expected_output` is `null`.

#### Validation messages

As discussed above the **validation** test type introduces a set of 
validation messages for that test type, but these messages might also be useful for other test types. For example:

The first test case in [`tests/types/pypi.test.json`](https://github.com/package-url/purl-spec/blob/main/tests/types/pypi-test.json) is an example of an **advanced** **roundtrip** test. The test case data is:

```
"description": "pypi names have special rules and not case sensitive. Roundtrip an input purl to canonical.",  
"test_group": "advanced",  
"test_type": "roundtrip",  
"input": "pkg:PYPI/Django_package@1.11.1.dev1",    
"expected_output": "pkg:pypi/django-package@1.11.1.dev1",  
"expected_failure": false,  
"expected_failure_reason": null
```  
 
 In this case it would be helpful for the test case to provide a ("warning" or 
 "info"?) message explaining the correction, such as:  
    - The pkg component must be lowercased.  
    - The name component must be lowercased.  
    - Runs of consecutive dash -, underscore _, or dot . characters must be 
    replaced with a single dash -.  

> Without a message the user will never know that there was a correction 

Author: Added comment
